Extracted from: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5f2xOxRGKqk&list=PL6rx9p3tbsMuk0jnC-dBdwb32Z1g7mD0j&index=1

The total number of memory cells change based on 1) Storage capacity of your smartphone 2) What year your smartphone was manufactured 3) How many bits are stored per cell. In 2020, 3 bits / cell is most common 1 bit = Single Level Cell, 2 bit = Multilevel Cell, 3 Bit = Tri-level cell, 4 Bits = Quad-level Cell. Each abbreviated SLC, MLC, TLC, QLC. 4) How many die, or chiplets are in your smartphone 5) Size of each chiplet This smartphone was released in 2015 when 64 GB storage was standard. FYI- this is an LGV10, my former phone. When I retire my current phone, a Samsung Galaxy 8, I'll consider updating the models. I've seen reports of stacking 16 chiplets, but these details are very seldom published. This layout is technically called Terabit Cell Array Transistor. or TCAT. A similar layout is called Bit Cost Scalable, or BiCS 40k x 50k x 100 = 200 Billion This size of layout with 8 chiplets is close to that used in 1TB microchips. 200 Billion x 3bits / cell = 6E11 Bits. = 1.5E11 Bytes. x 8 chiplets = 1.2E12 bytes. 1E12 = 1 Terabyte, so 1.2E12 bytes = 1.2 Terabytes. Why does a 1TB chip have 1.2 TB of space? The answer to why chips have extra space is that they use error correcting code to improve the reliability of each memory cell. For reference. The dielectric is composed of silicon dioxide [SiO2] Which is pretty much sand! There are very expensive machines to make the exact thickness of dielectric. The charge trap is made of Polysilicon Nitride [SiN] This is also a dielectric material, but with different properties. When electrons get placed into the charge trap [SiN] they get trapped between boundary layers of the polysilicon. Think of it as a pane of cracked glass, that is still together in a full sheet. The electrons can find space in the cracks of the cracked glass. The channel is composed of undoped or lightly N doped Polysilicon. So, an important detail is that this explaination is what's happening when we write information to a memory cell. When reading information or erasing information, The channel, charge trap, and gate each function in a different way. It's like how when you write, read, or get rid of a book, the way you treat the book is all very different.  

Lots of other texts use Classical mechanics when discussing quantum tunneling But, by most definitions, classical mechanics deals with the motion of macroscopic bodies. Electrons and their behavior fall under electromagnetism Which is under the category of physics, not classical mechanics. Again, as mentioned before, the height is not a physical dimension. But rather, it's a band gap, or energy gap level. The energy band gap for SiO2 is 8.9eV. But an easier number to understand is the dielectric strength, or breakdown voltage. Which is the voltage at which an insulating material has a catastrophic failure and breaks. For SiO2, it is 1E7 [10^7] V/cm. Which comes out to 1V/nm thickness. But breakdown voltage is not linear in the least. Thinner materials have exponentially higher dielectric strengths [V/cm] Also, reaching the breakdown voltage would damage the dielectric. When WRITING to a memory cell, the gate voltage is around 16.5 - 22.5V Writing is more often called 'Programming' a cell. But I chose to call it write becausue 'programming' is very easily confused with coding. In contrast, when READING from a memory cell, the voltage applied to the gate is between 0-4V. When ERASING a memory cell, a negative voltage is applied to the Gate and a positive voltage to the channel. This tunnels the electrons back into the channel. _Tho the ERASE tunneling is a little different, and it is called Hot Carrier Injection. Whereas this tunneling is called Fowler-Nordheim Tunneling. More details are that the electrons in the channel are at a higher band gap then the electrons in the charge trap. Hence, moving electrons from the channel to charge trap requires less energy than the reverse direction. Thus the dielectric can more easily get damaged when erasing a cell vs. writing to a cell._ The next question: How do we write a specific amount of electrons to the charge trap? The short answer: We apply series of stepping up voltages to the gate. [16.5-22.5V] And between each step up in voltage, we measure the threshold voltage of that paticular charge trap. If the desired threshold voltage is reached, then we stop the stepping up of voltage sequence applied to the gate.  

There are devices that have small dimensions, but they are all close to this size of 4-12 nm. For a thickness of 8nm, there are around 75-100 atoms. SiO2 is a network of tetrahedral cells with the bond angle at approximately 145deg. But variation between 100deg and 175deg. O to O bond distance is .262nm, and Si to O is .162nm At 145 deg, and .262nm O to O distance, in 8nm we get 61 atoms. However, SiO2 is not arranged in a perfect lattice as it is Polycrystalline. So that pushes it closer to 75 atoms. Clarification: This extra voltage is actually more for when erasing a cell. In this fly-through, the grey is Si, the red is O, and the blueish-green are covalent bonds where the shared electrons can e found. Moving on: I hope you like this explaination of an application of quantum mechanics.  

Adding electrons changes the threshold voltage of the charge trap and charge trap is measured by changing the voltage on the gate and seeing then the gate allows current to flow through. This threshold voltage is then determined and converted to a binary equivalent. _Erasing a cell requires around 25-30V, which can sometimes cause the electrons to damage the insulating material. This is what causes SSD to have a limited life-span and limited number of read/writes cycles._

Information is stored as pages. When SSD reads information it reads in pages. But when computer erases information, it erases it in blocks. This is because the erasing process requires around 25-30 V compared to reading and writing process t around 2-7V. Also, when data is erased, the entire block is erased, so sometimes when you want to erase just a page the surrounding pages are moved elsewhere, and the entire block is erased.
