1. The difference between following a recipe and understanding cooking: Recipe gives a set of rubrics to make a loaf of bread and to make it that is all you need but the problem with it is recipes have limited scope (can't cook omelet with bread recipe) but if you have a deep understanding of cooking (ex: thermodynamics (bake), biology (yeast) there is a different way of viewing everything (opens possibilities to make sandwich, breads, whatever you want). Following large set of recipes might solve a problem but when you don't find what you want one day, what do you do? Not everyone requires deep understanding (nothing gets done) but if you don't when you need you'll do the wrong thing. - Jim Keller
2. Don't be fooled by the many books on complexity or by the many complex and arcane algorithms you find in this book or elsewhere. Although there are no textbooks on simplicity, simple systems work and complex don't. - Jim Gray
3. AI is/can evolve in a non genetic manner, removing the need of intelligent beings reproducing more in order to evolve human intelligence/brains. -Richard Dawkins
4. Deep learning is essentially System 1 (fast, unconscious, automatic), as it does not reason or does that deep thinking a human system 2 (slow, conscious, effortful) does. - Daniel Kahneman
5. Reasons have little to do with what you believe, reasons are stories that comes to your minds when you have to explain yourself. Similarly, AI doesn't need to explain itself, it just needs to tell a convincing (happens usually when some elements of truth does exit) story. - Daniel Kahneman
6. Everyone knows that debugging is twice as hard as writing a program in the first place. So if you're as clever as you can be when you write it, how will you ever debug it? - Brian Kernighan
7. Matter tells spacetime how to curve, spacetime tells matter how to move. - John Wheeler
8. There are only two hard things in computer science: cache invalidation, naming things and off-by-one errors.
